the purpose of this video is sincerely
educational I am going to try very hard
to address a widespread left-wing
misconception about economics and
politics I'm going to try to address it
with absolutely zero mocking tone guys
I was raised left-wing I grew up
left-wing in a left wing town my parents
to say they were left-wing is an
understatement
alright but you personally are not going
to be able to make progress and become a
better educated more sophisticated
person and your movement is not going to
be able to make progress if you can't
sit back in a somewhat skeptical and
Socratic way question some of the non
empirical assumptions that are
underpinning your moral ethical economic
and political claims today's profit can
only be achieved through growth a
capitalist must always push production
farther and farther however production
requires the use of goods that are not
infinite like labour and natural
resources since capitalism cannot
administer a limit it will always
eventually crash in other words
capitalism always ends up destroying the
hand that feeds it eventually you will
run into a situation whereby the
capitalists produce too many goods which
the masses of people who are now in
poverty can't afford to buy back and as
you know when there is no purchasing
power there is a recession aka a crisis
of capitalism the second major problem
that results from this inevitability of
overproduction is environmental crisis
meaning a corporation will run out of
resources to use or that pollution will
start to be so great that it will start
to affect the costs of production this
is the natural outcome from a system
that seeks to produce the most amount of
goods for the least amount of money
possible capitalism is a system that
needs to perpetually grow and perpetual
growth
a finite planet with finite resources is
impossible yes this philosophical claim
were true it would have some definite
real-world implications it would
necessarily mean that a capitalist
society with zero growth would be a
disaster would be a dystopia would be in
a state of internal calamity tearing
itself apart the workers struggling
against their employers so on and so
forth right so if this is not just a
Dogma if this is not a doctrine if this
is not just an abstract principle that
you're gonna insist is true regardless
of the facts then we should be able to
test this empirically in the real world
so if you're a left winger and you've
believed in this hypothesis for years
maybe you've been out in the streets and
you've seen people chanting it and
you've seen it written on placards maybe
you've heard people you know preaching
it from the podium and political events
it's something I've heard all my life
and very few people pause to reflect on
what it really means did I ask you to
have some sympathy for the other side
here I want you as a left-wing person to
sympathize with a right-wing person
who's grown up being told by their
parents their grandparents and their the
church officials no the church father
the church pastor they've been told by
authority figures all their lives that
the best way to organize society is to
let everyone own guns the gun control
would be a terrible thing that the most
peaceful and safe way to emphasize make
sure everybody is carrying done all the
time a lot of right when people grew up
with that and to challenge that
conception you have to say wait a minute
why don't we look at real-world examples
of societies that have very strict gun
control where nobody owns guns are very
very few people on guns just the police
have guns nobody oh why don't we take a
look at those societies now that work in
the real world okay
the right wing person who grew up with
the mentality of justifying gun
ownership they may have a completely
coherent abstract argument from
principles from from axioms as to why
they think the world would be a better
place
if everyone can own a gun and how it's
gonna lead to some kind of terrible
tyranny despotism or actually higher
crime rates and higher rates of armed
rebellion and this kind of social social
unrest social upheaval if you restrict
the number of people who own guns that
may seem convincing written out on a
chalkboard in abstract principles but
then when you work from real-world
examples you thought of setting huh
there are a lot of examples of societies
that exist in the real world where
almost nobody owns guns very strict gun
control laws and sheath quality of life
there is pretty good you know GE we have
positive hills so I'm in the same
position in addressing this argument to
a person person who's committed to this
view that capitalism without growth
without constant growth without infinite
growth the capitalism without high rates
of growth will be a disaster have you
heard of Japan Japan is constantly
referred to in the mainstream press as a
zero growth society has been for decades
you can look up the precise statistics
yourself if you wanna you can look up a
chart of GDP growth in Japan over the
last five years and you'll see it's
sometimes below zero so so with negative
growth and so it's just slightly above
zero right now it's about half a
percentage point of pump zero and then
it goes back down again so over the last
ten years GDP growth in Japan has
hovered above zero often enough going
below zero so people generalize and they
say Japan is a zero growth capitalist
society now in the same way that I have
to ask a right-wing person I have to ask
a conservative person to look at the
reality of life in countries in Western
Europe that have very tight gun control
laws I have to ask them his life they're
really so terrible and is it so terrible
for this reason I have to ask you as a
left-wing person to put down your
preconceptions to not insist on this
abstract
and look at the reality of what a
capitalist democratic society looks like
in the real world with zero growth or
even with negative growth with a
contracting economy
it may be mystifying for you to
understand at first it may be difficult
for you to understand at first why is it
or how is it that life in Japan is so
good without growth without what you
call this this form of this supposed
requirement of capitalism being a
vibrant Society but capitalism and Japan
is still a vibrant Society people in
Japan very good quality education a very
good quality health care almost zero
crime very very low crime rates almost
zero unemployment very very low
unemployment rates okay
in many obvious ways life in Japan
during the last ten years the Japanese
people have had a higher quality of life
in Japan under capitalism with zero
growth then any communist society ever
had in any 10-year period really think
about that with zero growth under
capitalism in Japan they have a better
quality of life than people had with
rapid GDP growth in the Soviet Union
rapid GDP growth in China grab another
interesting example rapid GDP growth in
in Vietnam okay you can go on down the
list for Cuban so now I am NOT saying
that in the last 10 years Japan was
paradise they have some problems but you
have to face up to the fundamental
empirical facts that make your theory
wildly implausible Japan is not a tiny
exception here and you could go through
the list of other countries capitalist
societies that had a very very low GDP
growth or negative GDP growth while
maintaining basically a wonderful
Society a wonderful quality of life but
even if Japan were the only example to
the contrary it's an example you have to
take seriously even if in the whole
world we only had one example of a
country with very tight regulation on
gun control you'd have to say to this
right-wing person I want you to look at
this country where nobody gets to own a
gun nobody except the police in the Army
I want you to recognize how society
works there that fundamentally it's not
this dystopia it's not this disaster
that it would have to be for your theory
to be plausible let alone for your
theory to be true ok so that's the page
we've got to start on with this
deep-seated left-wing assumption about
infinite growth and the significance of
growth in a capitalist economy however
production requires the use of goods
that are not infinite like labour and
natural resources since capitalism
cannot administer a limit it will always
eventually crash growth does not mean
wealth growth does not mean the
difference between a good society and a
bad Society ok you could have a wealthy
society with very limited growth or with
no growth at all
that's what Japan is an example of you
can have a society that's tremendously
successful and vibrant that does not
have economic growth and you could have
a society in which the individual
members are all becoming wealthier all
while economic growth is contracting
while GDP growth is negative that's
basically what's happening in Japan
right now ok how is that possible if one
family has ten children that's a lot of
economic growth because what you're
measuring when you talk about economic
growth is just total production and
total consumption that's it
so if every family in your society has
ten kids it's a lot of economic growth
is that society becoming a better
society or is that society becoming a
poorer Society or could it be that all
of the children in that society are
getting poorer and poorer for one thing
they don't inherit very much from their
parents for another thing their quality
of education the intellectual and
emotional enrichment growing up there
are a lot of problems when you have a
society where
one has 10 kids footnote my father had
nine kids
I was the ninth of nine I'm living proof
of this theory what if you have a
society where every family has only one
child what happens economic growth is
negative you have less total production
you're less total consumption but
individual wealth is greater quality of
life for all the people in the society
as a whole is greater right each of
those children is going to inherit all
the wealth from both parents they're
gonna get way more care and attention
better education they will almost
inevitably in that situation with with
population collapse each individual
member of society will be more
productive with a higher rate of
productivity as an individual however
that one person's production can't
compete with ten children
they're never gonna produce as much as
if the parents had ten kids you know
doing similar jobs okay so it's a very
strange situation where the far-left has
tried to criticize capitalism as if one
of capitalism's greatest strengths is
its greatest weakness capitalist
societies can be wonderful and vibrant
even in the absence of growth even with
zero growth Japan proves it
moreover finite resources are good for
capitalism
whereas infinite resources are really
problematic in Japan when labor is
finite when there are fewer and fewer
people who can do the job then the whole
market the free market without the
government forcing them to has to
respond to this by offering more and
better incentives for labor jobs have to
pay higher wages jobs can't just be
dead-end jobs they have to offer some
kind of training education upward
mobility if you have an infinite pool of
cheap labour who are willing to work for
less
minimum wage if you have people coming
across the border illegally who are
willing to work in a in a factory making
shirts at a cloth and they say hey
they'll work for 50 percent of minimum
wage because they're they're as illegal
laborers the factory owner has no
motivation to provide these people with
upward mobility or benefits or higher
pay he also has no motivation the
factory owner has no motivation to try
to increase their personal productivity
through better training through use of
more advanced technology through
reorganizing the factory hey labor is
cheap and it's now very profitable to
make shirts to take cloth and
manufacture it into a shirt with no
machinery no skilled labor then let's
say someone builds a wall and all of a
sudden that factory has no access to
cheap illegal migrant labor anymore all
of a sudden they have to pay everyone
$15 an hour and they have to compete
with every other company to pay people
$15 an hour or more now the owner of
that factory without government
intervention has a huge motivation to
provide some kind of better life for the
employees whether that's through upward
mobility education job training
something or just paying them more money
okay suddenly also that factory owner
has a huge motivation to try to make
each hour that all of his employees are
working to make them more productive hey
all of a sudden I'm paying you guys four
times as much money so how many shirts
can we really make it a cloth here and
what kind of investment do I need to
make in better technology or a better
organization or something so that we can
still compete this is a factor within
capitalism that even Karl Marx
understood very well and yet the far
left wing is choosing to forget it in
2019 in the 21st century so that they
can pretend capitalism is brittle in
precisely the ways in which capitalism
is robust finally any argument that
scarcity itself is a problem for
capitalism there's an onus on the person
making the argument to explicate what is
it that's unique about capitalism that
makes this a problem if there's not
enough drinking water people will die
it's true but it's not true because of
capitalism and it's not any less true in
a society that's organized around
feudalism
well this organized around communism
okay but what capitalism has are
tremendous advantages in responding to
scarcity through the price mechanism
communism didn't have those advantages
and it led to disasters feudalism didn't
have those advantages and let the
disaster okay
scarcity is a fact of life for all
actually existing economic systems in
the history of the world but if you
thought scarcity itself the absence of
infinite factor and inputs the lack of
infinite labor resources the lack of
infinite water infinite coal infinite
steel if you thought that was a problem
for the history of capitalism why can't
you point to real examples in history
where that problem demonstrated itself
whether in Japan Denmark or anywhere
else on this earth guys the slogan that
capitalism requires infinite growth is a
slogan that many left-wingers have heard
chanted had marches they've seen it
written on placards they've heard it
said in speeches but political leaders
they've seen it written in propaganda
literature again and again and again and
people live their whole lives that's
stopping a question what would be the
empirical basis for that claim how could
it possibly be economically demonstrably
true that in a world where nothing is
infinite capitalism must have infinity
to be sustainable Japan is a great
example that shows us capitalism doesn't
just thrive on finitude capitalism can
thrive with zero growth